in December 2022 the most far-right
government in Israel's history came to
power notable inclusions are national
security minister Ben gavier previously
convicted of supporting a terrorist
organization and Finance Minister bzel
smartd a settler well known for racist
comments and extreme
policies they quickly approved plans to
build thousands of homes for Israeli
settlers in the occupied West Bank
construction that's illegal under
international law the new policy led to
an increase in Israeli raids and attacks
by both Israeli settlers and Palestinian
Fighters these are scenes from haara in
February hundreds of Israelis from a
nearby settlement went on a rampage
through the town of 8,000 Palestinians
after two settlers were gunned downridge
called for haara to be
erased hu was targeted again on Friday
Israeli settlers shot a resident in the
heart after a Palestinian gunman opened
fire at an Israeli
vehicle Palestinian armed resistance has
increased since March last year after
Israel's incursion at alaxa mosque and
renewed raids on the occupied West Bank
and
Gaza Israel has repeatedly said it will
root out these
fighters in early July it launched a
two-day assault in Janine refugee camp
in the occupied West
Bank more than 3,000 Palestinians fled
the air strikes bulldozers armored tanks
and drones and this was the
result Janine's Deputy Governor said 80%
of the homes of the camp were destroyed
damaged or
burned attacks and raids take place in
occupied territories nearly every
day in April isra forces attacked Muslim
worshippers in alaka mosque during
Ramadan
prayers an action the UN condemned as
excessive and in recent days thousands
of ultra nationalist Jews have been
entering the mosque compound escorted by
Israeli police a move condemned by the
Jordanian wak the custodians of the
mosque Hamas officials have long said
they will respond to Israel at a time
and place of very choosing but
Saturday's attack seemed to take many by
surprise Laura Khan Al
jazer so there's been a global concern
over the spike in violence between
Israelis and Palestinians got two
correspondents monitoring that uh Ros
Jordan's in Washington DC Harry forcet
in London we're going to start with
Washington DC and Rosland uh so Ros
what's tell us more about the US
response and how that shaping you
up well essentially US government
support is for Israel Hamas has been a
terrorist organization according to the
US government since 1997 so you would be
hardpressed to find anyone whether in
the Biden Harris Administration or in
Congress for that matter anyone who
would support Hamas just as an
organization never mind the attack that
was launched overnight Friday into
Saturday into Southern Israel uh the
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin has
made the rounds of the Sunday public
affairs shows here in Washington and he
not only repeated the US government's
support for Israel and its right to
defend itself its territory and its
citizens but blinkin has also indicated
that the us is going to announce some
new steps some new support for Israel as
it tries to respond to this attack later
on Sunday we don't know yet the shape of
what this support is but supposedly it
is in response to additional Aid that
the Israeli government has made to
Washington in the last 24 hours it is
also worth uh pointing out that uh
blinkin during his rounds of phone calls
on Saturday did have occasion to speak
with Mahmud abas the uh Palestinian
Authority uh leader as well as speaking
with other Regional leaders including
his counterparts in Egypt in Jordan in
Turkey uh really to try to figure out
how they all can try to deescalate
tensions even though at this point it's
now about how to end this two-day long
War Ros thanks for that that's a picture
in Washington DC what's the story in
Europe Harry foret standing by there in
London for us and Harry Benin Netanyahu
the Israeli Prim Minister has been
speaking to some European
leaders that's right yes he says he
spoken to the leaders of Germany Ukraine
Italy and Britain uh saying that each of
those leaders expressed their
unqualified support for Israel's right
to defend itself uh also another line
just coming through from Germany in the
last few minutes that the uh government
is reviewing its policy of Aid to
Palestinians worth hundreds of millions
of Euros or or US dollars per year the
minister in charge of that program
saying these attacks Mark a terrible
fracture and some debates between right
and left uh in German politics uh some
on the right the conservatives saying
that a new start is needed and that
terrorists should never be funded again
um there has also been a much wider
scale of condemnation from other
European powers as well I think a lot of
the concentration a lot of the reporting
certainly is about the sheer scale of
the targeting killing kidnapping of
civilians on such a huge scale inside
Israeli territory and taking so many of
those captives back into Gaza uh some of
those are being found to be foreign
Nationals one missing Britain uh one
woman whose body was apparently
displayed uh now said to be a German
citizen so concerns on that front as
well and concerns being expressed about
Jewish communities inside Europe as well
the Italian government the French and
German governments talking about the
needs to ensure security at Jewish sites
and we've had a tweet from the Home
Secretary here in the UK the interior
Minister on Sunday talking about
rejecting and uh stopping any attempts
to stir up hatred against British Jews
doing everything necessary to protect
Jewish communities and showing zero
tolerance for what she called the
glorification of terrorism she's calling
for the police to use the full force of
the law against anyone exhibiting
displays of support for Hamas and other
such groups Harry thanks for that that's
a picture in Europe Harry for reporting
from London
London Let's cross now to Yan neeland
who's Secretary General of the Norwegian
Refugee Council joins us now from Oslo
good to see you there Mr egeland first
of all your reaction to this escalating
crisis well a a terrible situation has
uh overnight gotten much much
worse my organization has been on the
ground now for decades uh in gasa in the
West Bank will become much worse now
because of this attack against the
Israeli civilians I followed myself now
the Israeli Palestinian Conflict for
nearly 50 years every time leaders
military and other leaders choose to
exert violence on civilians they inflict
hor Horrors not only on the other side
but also on their on their um own side
this will become much much worse in the
next days apart from the the tragedy of
what's happened it's the fact that this
it was a seemingly indiscriminate attack
by her mass fighters on just so many
Israelis yeah indeed completely
indiscriminate the Rockets are the
missiles are but also go they go around
shooting random civilians they took
hostages among random civilians of
course this is now the the images spread
around the world it's a disaster for for
for the Palestinian cause because now
the retaliation will be enormous it will
again be civilians paying the price uh
there is one way out and that is a very
strong United International pressure on
all the political and Military Elites uh
that they have to deal escalate and have
now to look at the root causes for these
conflicts yeah but will they we've been
saying that for for decades haven't we
and and the Israeli perspective is that
this was an entirely unprovoked attack
and certainly uh it's time to consider
as a matter of urgency the the cause and
effect here of all those people living
under blockade in Gaza 56 years of
military occupation and so on and so
forth but we've talked about that as I
say for many many years and it's got
nowhere and now we are in this terrible
situation yes we are and and then one is
talking about teaching the other side a
lesson so they will not repeat any
violence of course this leads to more
cycles of of violence and that's my
point the sites are
incapable of putting an end to the
endless cycles of violence that's why we
need the US the Arab countries there has
been talks of late there can be again
talks but then there has been much more
pressure the retaliation I mean the
Hamas says this is
Revenge Israel will now rightfully say
well we were attack now we will exert
Revenge it will be with children paying
the price you hear all around
condemnation from the liks of the US the
UK and France but there's no mention no
reference to the causes behind this and
and so why is that and why is there such
a failure of the international
effort well I mean the international
effort I mean to to today any
politicians in the west will look at the
uh Hamas attack and will say we're with
Israel and it right to defend ourselves
but of course part of the problems that
we humanitarians we are neutral
impartial independent and on the ground
and in this Crossfire what we see is to
completely polarized images of what is
happening in in in large parts of the
Arab world the large part of the
nonwestern world they will now watch
mosques and apartment blocks and so on
being attacked of course in the western
America and in Israel they see children
being kidnapped humiliated killed by by
by armed grown
men those are the two images and that
they lead to the two sides dehumanizing
it
right from the point of view of people
on the ground and in the as you say in
the coming Crossfire that that seems to
be inevitably coming uh and the children
and the elderly and everybody who's
there within Gaza about to to face this
from a humanitarian perspective what do
you do to prepare for it and and how can
you make things easier when it does
come well I mean we in ref count we have
hundreds of colleagues on the ground in
West Bank and in Gaza where there we
have tried to rebuild now time and again
in Gaza each time you are able to
rebuild fewer of the of the total uh
amount of of of Civilian housing that
has has been destroyed before there was
a new attack same thing this time H the
Border closures will make it very
difficult for us to come with with
relief to people uh there will be power
shortages so the health colleagues will
not even have power for for hospitals
except
generat that will be soon be lacking
fuel it will be a nightmare even to help
uh the innocent
civilians Yan egland good to speak to
you and get your perspective on this
important perspective thank you so much
Yan Egan Secretary General of the
Norwegian Refugee Council speaking to us
from Oslo thank
you